Blog post for DataFusion 46.0.0 (#64)
apache/datafusion-site: content/blog/2025-03-24-datafusion-46.0.0.md

For example, if a filter expression is applied to a column with a known uniform distribution range, the optimizer can propagate that to estimate result selectivity more accurately. Similarly, comparisons (=, >, etc.) on columns yield Bernoulli distributions (true/false probabilities) in this model

This is a foundational change: the immediate user-visible effect is limited (the optimizer won’t yet magically become a genius), but it lays groundwork for more advanced query planning in the future. Over time, as these `Distribution`'s get integrated, DataFusion will be able to make smarter decisions like more aggressive parquet pruning, better join orderings, and so on based on data distribution assumptions. Note that for now, the framework is in place and being hooked up (with basic support for propagation of Uniform and handling of some combos), but it’s not fully exploited yet. Think of this as an investment in performance improvements down the line.

### Aggregate Monotonicity and Window Ordering

> DataFusion 46.0.0 adds a new concept of [set](https://github.com/apache/datafusion/pull/14271#)[-monotonicity](https://github.com/apache/datafusion/blob/5210a2bac32e43dc7bf6e7e6000cdeaf2833c06e/datafusion/expr/src/udaf.rs#L1090) for certain transformations, which helps avoid unnecessary sort operations. In particular, the planner now understands when a **window function preserves ordering** of data (or when a sorted input remains sorted after the operation). For example, a window-aggregate like `MAX` on a column that is not ordered can be known to be still ordered. PR [#14271](https://github.com/apache/datafusion/pull/14271) introduced a “set-monotonicity” property for window functions, and a follow-up PR [#14813](https://github.com/apache/datafusion/pull/14813) refined the handling of sort order in window frames. Huge thanks to [@berkaysynnada](https://github.com/berkaysynnada) and [@mertak-synnada](https://github.com/mertak-synnada) for this feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DataFusion 46.0.0 adds a new concept of [set](https://github.com/apache/datafusion/pull/14271#)[-monotonicity](https://github.com/apache/datafusion/blob/5210a2bac32e43dc7bf6e7e6000cdeaf2833c06e/datafusion/expr/src/udaf.rs#L1090) for certain transformations, which helps avoid unnecessary sort operations. In particular, the planner now understands when a **window function introduces new orderings of data**. For example, DataFusion now recognizes that a window-aggregate like `MAX` on a column can have an ordering even if the column itself doesn't have an ordering (for certain window frames). PR [#14271](https://github.com/apache/datafusion/pull/14271) introduced a “set-monotonicity” property for window functions, and a follow-up PR [#14813](https://github.com/apache/datafusion/pull/14813) refined the handling of sort order in window frames. Huge thanks to [@berkaysynnada](https://github.com/berkaysynnada) and [@mertak-synnada](https://github.com/mertak-synnada) for this feature.
```

> DataFusion 46.0.0 adds a new concept of [set](https://github.com/apache/datafusion/pull/14271#)[-monotonicity](https://github.com/apache/datafusion/blob/5210a2bac32e43dc7bf6e7e6000cdeaf2833c06e/datafusion/expr/src/udaf.rs#L1090) for certain transformations, which helps avoid unnecessary sort operations. In particular, the planner now understands when a **window function introduces new orderings of data**. For example, DataFusion now recognizes that a window-aggregate like `MAX` on a column can have an ordering even if the column itself doesn't have an ordering (for certain window frames). PR [#14271](https://github.com/apache/datafusion/pull/14271) introduced a “set-monotonicity” property for window functions, and a follow-up PR [#14813](https://github.com/apache/datafusion/pull/14813) refined the handling of sort order in window frames. Huge thanks to [@berkaysynnada](https://github.com/berkaysynnada) and [@mertak-synnada](https://github.com/mertak-synnada) for this feature.

Reviewer 2: I think it would be easier to understand why this feature is valuable if there is some example query showing what type of query now works / is optimized. Not required just a thought

> ## Performance Improvements

Reviewer 2: I suggest moving the `Performance Improvements` and `GSOC` sections above the notable new features as I think they are a nice lead in to the release

Reviewer: Agreed, let's do it

- **No More RowConverter in Grouped Ordering:** We removed an inefficient step in the *partial grouping* algorithm. The `GroupOrderingPartial` operator no longer converts data to “row format” for each batch (via `RowConverter`). Instead, it uses a direct arrow-based approach to detect sort key changes. This eliminated overhead and yields a nice speedup for certain aggregation queries. (PR [#14566](https://github.com/apache/datafusion/pull/14566) by [@ctsk](https://github.com/ctsk)).
- **Predicate Pruning for `NOT LIKE`:** DataFusion’s parquet reader can now prune row groups using `NOT LIKE` filters, similar to how it handles `LIKE`. This means if you have a filter such as `column NOT LIKE 'prefix%'`, DataFusion can use min/max statistics to skip reading files/parts that can be determined to either entirely match or not match the predicate. In particular, a pattern like `NOT LIKE 'X%'` can skip data ranges that definitely start with "X". While a niche case, it contributes to query efficiency in those scenarios (PR [#14567](https://github.com/apache/datafusion/pull/14567) by [@UBarney](https://github.com/UBarney)).

> - **`UNION [ALL|DISTINCT] BY NAME` Support:** While not a pure speed optimization, it’s worth noting we added support for `UNION BY NAME` (both `UNION BY NAME` which is distinct by default, and `UNION ALL BY NAME`). This allows combining two result sets by aligning columns by name instead of by position, which can save you from manual `SELECT` reordering and thus simplify query logic. The new logical plan builder functions `union_by_name()`and `union_by_name_distinct()` correspond to these operations. This feature, inspired by systems like Spark and DuckDB, makes it easier to union heterogenous datasets. (PR [#14538](https://github.com/apache/datafusion/pull/14538) by [@rkrishn7](https://github.com/rkrishn7))

Reviewer 2: I think these last two items are more features that performance -- maybe we can list them under a new heading of "New Features" or something

## Get Involved

Apache DataFusion is an open-source project, and we welcome involvement from anyone interested. Now is a great time to take 46.0.0 for a spin: try it out on your workloads, and let us know if you encounter any issues or have suggestions. You can report bugs or request features on our GitHub issue tracker, or better yet, submit a pull request. Join our community discussions – whether you have questions, want to share how you’re using DataFusion, or are looking to contribute, we’d love to hear from you. A list of open issues suitable for beginners is [here](https://github.com/apache/arrow-datafusion/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22good+first+issue%22) and you can find how to reach us on the [communication doc](https://datafusion.apache.org/contributor-guide/communication.html).

> Happy querying!

Reviewer 2: Love it!

## Highlighted New Features

### Improved Diagnostics

DataFusion 46.0.0 introduces a new [**SQL Diagnostics framework**](https://github.com/apache/datafusion/issues/14429) to make error messages more understandable. This comes in the form of new `Diagnostic` and `DiagnosticEntry` types, which allow the system to attach rich context (like source query text spans) to error messages. In practical terms, certain planner errors will now point to the exact location in your SQL query that caused the issue. 

For example, if you reference an unknown table or miss a column in `GROUP BY` the error message will include the query snippet causing the error. These diagnostics are meant for end-users of applications built on DataFusion, providing clearer messages instead of generic errors. Here’s an example:

> <img src="/blog/images/datafusion-46.0.0/diagnostic-example.png" alt="Parquet pruning pipeline in DataFusion" width="80%" class="img-responsive">

Reviewer 3: is `alt="Parquet pruning pipeline in DataFusion"` a copy/paste error?

> Currently, diagnostics cover unresolved table/column references, missing `GROUP BY`columns, ambiguous references, wrong number of UNION columns, type mismatches, and a few others. Future releases will extend this to more error types. This feature should greatly ease debugging of complex SQL by pinpointing errors directly in the query text. We thank [@eliaperantoni](https://github.com/eliaperantoni) for his contributions in this project.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Currently, diagnostics cover unresolved table/column references, missing `GROUP BY` columns, ambiguous references, wrong number of UNION columns, type mismatches, and a few others. Future releases will extend this to more error types. This feature should greatly ease debugging of complex SQL by pinpointing errors directly in the query text. We thank [@eliaperantoni](https://github.com/eliaperantoni) for his contributions in this project.
```
